data/blog/number-theory/20230108DivisionAlgorithm-en.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Division Algorithm'
date: '2023/01/10'
tags:  ['algorithms', 'mathematics', 'number theory', 'python']
draft: false
summary: 'A division algorithm is a process that divides one number (called the dividend) by another number (called the divisor) and obtains the quotient and remainder of the division. A division algorithm can be implemented in Python using a while loop and subtracting the divisor from the dividend in each iteration. Knowing how a division algorithm works and how to implement it on our own is useful for understanding better how divisions work and can be useful in situations where we cannot use predefined libraries or functions.'
bibliography: references-data.bib
canonicalUrl: 'https://www.asanchezyali.com/blog/20230108DivisionAlgorithm/'
headerImage: '/images/division-algorithm.jpg'
language: 'en'
---

Division is a basic mathematical operation that we often use in our daily lives. Although we can easily perform divisions using predefined functions or libraries, it is important to know how a division algorithm works and how to implement it on our own.

In mathematics the division algorithm is stated as follows:

<div className="italic text-gray-50">Given two integers $a$ and $b$, with $b\neq 0$, we can find an integer $q$ and an integer $r$ such that $a = bq + r$ and $0 \leq r <|b|$. The integer $q$ is called the quotient and the integer $r$ is called the remainder of the division of $a$ by $b$. In the case where $b$ is negative, the quotient $q$ is negative and the remainder $r$ is positive.</div>

The above theorem defines a way to calculate the quotient and remainder of a division, but it does not seem to be an algorithm itself. However, its mathematical approach can be useful in developing an efficient division algorithm. The idea is to apply the concepts of the theorem to create a systematic and repetitive process that allows dividing two numbers and obtaining the desired result. In this way, we can use logic and mathematics to solve practical problems and apply theory in practice.


We will begin with the implementation of the division algorithm from the concepts of the previous theorem. To do this, we need a systematic and repetitive approach that allows dividing two numbers and obtaining the quotient and remainder of the division.

To do this, before we start implementing the algorithm, let's see how a division would be done by hand to better understand the process. For example, if we divide $17$ by $5$, we can perform the division as follows:

1. We initialize the dividend with the value $17$ and the divisor with the value $5$. We also initialize the quotient to 0 and the remainder to $0$.

2. We check if the dividend is greater than or equal to the divisor. Since $17$ is greater than $5$, we enter the next loop defined by steps 3 and 4.

3. We subtract the divisor from the dividend and obtain a new value for the dividend: $17 - 5 = 12$.

4. We increase the value of the quotient by one: $0 + 1 = 1$.

5. We again check if the dividend is greater than or equal to the divisor. Since $12$ is greater than $5$, we repeat steps 3 and 4.

6. We repeat steps 3 and 4 until the dividend is less than the divisor. In this case, after two additional iterations, the dividend becomes $2$.

7. The final value of the quotient is $3$, which is the result of the division $17 / 5$. The final value of the remainder is $2$, which is the modulo of the division.

What happens if the dividend is less than the divisor? In this case, the quotient is $0$ and the remainder is the value of the dividend. For example, if we divide $3$ by $5$, the quotient is $0$ and the remainder is $3$.

An example of code in Python that implements the above process is as follows:

```python
def division(dividend, divisor):
    if divisor == 0:
        raise ValueError("Divisor cannot be zero")

    if dividend < divisor:
        return 0, dividend

    quotient = 0
    remainder = dividend
    while remainder >= divisor:
        remainder = remainder - divisor
        quotient += 1
    return quotient, remainder

dividend = int(input("Enter the dividend: "))
divisor = int(input("Enter the divisor: "))
quotient, remainder = division(dividend, divisor)
print("Quotient: ", quotient)
print("Remainder: ", remainder)
```

This code performs the division of two numbers entered by the user. First, the variables  `quotient`  y `remainder`,  are defined, and the value of the dividend is assigned to `remainder`. hen, a `while` loop is used that runs while `remainder` is greater than or equal to `divisor`. EOn each iteration, `divisor`  is subtracted from `remainder` and the value of `quotient` s increased by one. Finally, the values of `quotient` and `remainder` are returned as the result of the `division()`  function.

When this code is executed and two numbers are provided as input, we will obtain the quotient and the remainder of the division. For example, if we divide $15$ by $3$, the result would be a quotient of $5$ and a remainder of $0$. If we divide $17$ by $3$, the result would be a quotient of $5$ and a remainder of $2$.

It is important to note that the division algorithm we have implemented is a basic and effective way of performing divisions, but there are other more advanced and efficient ways. However, this example is useful for understanding the basic concepts behind division and how to apply them in practice with a programming language.

I hope this helps you understand how a division algorithm works and how to implement it in Python without using libraries. If you have any additional questions, feel free to ask.

## Sponsorship
Finally, if you want to support us financially, we leave you our cryptocurrency addresses in Bitcoin, Solana and Ethereum, as well as our PayPal account. Thank you very much for your support:

₿itcoin: [bc1qrcecrz47ywrcnyuqknzgzzz2t3lwawyjnl4t7f](https://www.exodus.com/)

Solana: [Ft8A8t3UyGZHjWNvtgruADnUgrij3uaFe7pLj9QNG44N](https://phantom.app/)

Ethereum: [0x886ce8Cc54cd0964E6939c5290242b1135D10C7f](https://metamask.io/)

Paypal: [@asanchezyali](https://paypal.me/asanchezyali?country.x=CO&locale.x=es_XC)

## Images

- [Unplash](https://unsplash.com/@antoine1003) - Antoine Dautry - [Pencil on system of equations](https://unsplash.com/photos/_zsL306fDc).

## References

1. [Felipe Zaldivar. 2012. Introducción a la teoría de números.](http://cbt1.edu.mx/Educacion/OC/Matematicas/Recursos/publication.pdf)

Commit message:

add table for the division algorithm

data/blog/number-theory/20230108DivisionAlgorithm-en.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Division Algorithm'
date: '2023/01/10'
tags:  ['algorithms', 'mathematics', 'number theory', 'python']
draft: false
summary: 'A division algorithm is a process that divides one number (called the dividend) by another number (called the divisor) and obtains the quotient and remainder of the division. A division algorithm can be implemented in Python using a while loop and subtracting the divisor from the dividend in each iteration. Knowing how a division algorithm works and how to implement it on our own is useful for understanding better how divisions work and can be useful in situations where we cannot use predefined libraries or functions.'
bibliography: references-data.bib
canonicalUrl: 'https://www.asanchezyali.com/blog/20230108DivisionAlgorithm/'
headerImage: '/images/division-algorithm.jpg'
language: 'en'
---

Division is a basic mathematical operation that we often use in our daily lives. Although we can easily perform divisions using predefined functions or libraries, it is important to know how a division algorithm works and how to implement it on our own.

In mathematics the division algorithm is stated as follows:

<div className="italic text-gray-50">Given two integers $a$ and $b$, with $b\neq 0$, we can find an integer $q$ and an integer $r$ such that $a = bq + r$ and $0 \leq r <|b|$. The integer $q$ is called the quotient and the integer $r$ is called the remainder of the division of $a$ by $b$. In the case where $b$ is negative, the quotient $q$ is negative and the remainder $r$ is positive.</div>

The above theorem defines a way to calculate the quotient and remainder of a division, but it does not seem to be an algorithm itself. However, its mathematical approach can be useful in developing an efficient division algorithm. The idea is to apply the concepts of the theorem to create a systematic and repetitive process that allows dividing two numbers and obtaining the desired result. In this way, we can use logic and mathematics to solve practical problems and apply theory in practice.


We will begin with the implementation of the division algorithm from the concepts of the previous theorem. To do this, we need a systematic and repetitive approach that allows dividing two numbers and obtaining the quotient and remainder of the division.

To do this, before we start implementing the algorithm, let's see how a division would be done by hand to better understand the process. For example, if we divide $17$ by $5$, we can perform the division as follows:

1. We initialize the dividend with the value $17$ and the divisor with the value $5$. We also initialize the quotient to 0 and the remainder equal to the dividend.

2. We check if the remainder is greater than or equal to the divisor. Since $17$ is greater than $5$, we enter the next loop defined by steps 3 and 4.

3. We subtract the divisor from the remainder and obtain a new value for the remainder: $17 - 5 = 12$.

4. We increase the value of the quotient by one: $0 + 1 = 1$.

5. We again check if the remainder is greater than or equal to the divisor. Since $12$ is greater than $5$, we repeat steps (3) and (4).

6. We repeat steps 3 and 4 until the remainder is less than the divisor. In this case, after two additional iterations, the dividend becomes $2$.

7. The final value of the quotient is $3$, which is the result of the division $17 / 5$, and the final value of the remainder is $2$, which is the modulo of the division.

To better visualize the process, we add a process table to the previous steps:

| Iteration | Dividend  | Divisor | Quotient | Remainder |
|-----------|-----------|---------|----------|-------|
| 1         | 17        | 5       | 0        | 17    |
| 2         | 17        | 5       | 1        | 12    |
| 3         | 17        | 5       | 2        | 7     |
| 4         | 17        | 5       | 3        | 2     |

This table clearly shows how the remainder decreases and the quotient increases in each iteration until the dividend is less than the divisor and the final result is obtained.

What happens if the dividend is less than the divisor? In this case, the quotient is $0$ and the remainder is the value of the dividend. For example, if we divide $3$ by $5$, the quotient is $0$ and the remainder is $3$.

In the next step, we will implement the division algorithm in Python. To do this, we need a systematic and repetitive approach that allows us to divide two numbers and get the quotient and remainder of the division. To do this, we must first define the values of the dividend and divisor. Then, we must check if the divisor is equal to $0$. If it is, the algorithm cannot continue and must raise an exception. If the divisor is different from $0$, we must check if the dividend is less than the divisor. If it is, the quotient is $0$ and the remainder is the value of the dividend. If the dividend is greater than the divisor, we must subtract the divisor from the dividend in each iteration until the dividend is less than the divisor. In this case, the quotient is the number of iterations and the remainder is the value of the dividend.

An example of code in Python that implements the above process is as follows:

```python
def division(dividend, divisor):
    if divisor == 0:
        raise ValueError("Divisor cannot be zero")

    if dividend < divisor:
        return 0, dividend

    quotient = 0
    remainder = dividend
    while remainder >= divisor:
        remainder = remainder - divisor
        quotient += 1
    return quotient, remainder

dividend = int(input("Enter the dividend: "))
divisor = int(input("Enter the divisor: "))
quotient, remainder = division(dividend, divisor)
print("Quotient: ", quotient)
print("Remainder: ", remainder)
```

This code performs the division of two numbers entered by the user. First, the variables  `quotient`  y `remainder`,  are defined, and the value of the dividend is assigned to `remainder`. hen, a `while` loop is used that runs while `remainder` is greater than or equal to `divisor`. EOn each iteration, `divisor`  is subtracted from `remainder` and the value of `quotient` s increased by one. Finally, the values of `quotient` and `remainder` are returned as the result of the `division()`  function.

When this code is executed and two numbers are provided as input, we will obtain the quotient and the remainder of the division. For example, if we divide $15$ by $3$, the result would be a quotient of $5$ and a remainder of $0$. If we divide $17$ by $3$, the result would be a quotient of $5$ and a remainder of $2$.

It is important to note that the division algorithm we have implemented is a basic and effective way of performing divisions, but there are other more advanced and efficient ways. However, this example is useful for understanding the basic concepts behind division and how to apply them in practice with a programming language.

I hope this helps you understand how a division algorithm works and how to implement it in Python without using libraries. If you have any additional questions, feel free to ask.

## Sponsorship
Finally, if you want to support us financially, we leave you our cryptocurrency addresses in Bitcoin, Solana and Ethereum, as well as our PayPal account. Thank you very much for your support:

₿itcoin: [bc1qrcecrz47ywrcnyuqknzgzzz2t3lwawyjnl4t7f](https://www.exodus.com/)

Solana: [Ft8A8t3UyGZHjWNvtgruADnUgrij3uaFe7pLj9QNG44N](https://phantom.app/)

Ethereum: [0x886ce8Cc54cd0964E6939c5290242b1135D10C7f](https://metamask.io/)

Paypal: [@asanchezyali](https://paypal.me/asanchezyali?country.x=CO&locale.x=es_XC)

## Images

- [Unplash](https://unsplash.com/@antoine1003) - Antoine Dautry - [Pencil on system of equations](https://unsplash.com/photos/_zsL306fDc).

## References

1. [Felipe Zaldivar. 2012. Introducción a la teoría de números.](http://cbt1.edu.mx/Educacion/OC/Matematicas/Recursos/publication.pdf)
